1  
  
The Physics of Causation  
Leroy Cronin1,2 and Sara I. Walker2,3 
1School of Chemistry, The University of Glasgow, University Avenue, Glasgow G12 
8QQ, UK. 
2Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. 
3Beyond Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, Arizona, USA 
Emails: Lee.Cronin@glasgow.ac.uk; sara.i.walker@asu.edu 
 
Abstract 
Assembly theory (AT) introduces a concept of  causation as a material property , 
constitutive of a metrology of evolution and selection. The physical scale of causation 
is quantified by the assembly index , defined as the minimum number of steps 
necessary for a distinguishable object to exist, where steps are assembled recursively. 
Observing countable copies of high assembly index objects indicates that a mechanism 
producing them is persistent, such that the object’s environment builds a memory that 
traps causation within a contingent chain. Copy number and assembly index together 
underlie a standardized metrology for detecting causation (assembly index), and 
evidence of contingency (copy number). Together, these allow a precise definition of 
a selective threshold in assembly space, understood as the set of all causal possibilities. 
This threshold  demarcates life (and its derivative agential, intelligent , and 
technological forms) as structures with persistent copies beyond the threshold . In 
introducing a fundamental concept of material causation to explain and measure life, 
AT represents a departure from prior theories of causation,  such as interventional 
ones, which have so far proven  incompatible with fundamental physics. We discuss 
how AT’s concept of causation  provides the foundation for a theory of physics in 
which novelty, contingency and the potential for open-endedness are fundamental, 
and determinism is emergent along assembled lineages.  
  
2  
  
Introduction 
Beyond a certain complexity threshold, the spontaneous formation of objects becomes 
vanishingly improbable, if not impossible . The chance of spontaneous formation  for 
even moderately complex objects is small enough that this has never been observed to 
happen. While spontaneous generation was ruled out as a plausible explanation for 
microbes over a century ago 1, the fluctuation into existence of arbitrarily complex 
objects persists as something allowed by current physics , introducing theoretical 
pathologies (e.g., Boltzmann brains, or requiring fine-tuning)2,3.  A more parsimonious 
explanation is that complex objects must be caused to exist , but this is incompatible 
with current physics, which has no concept of ‘cause’.  
 
Prior to the 1800s, life’s origin was thought to be spontaneous. A prominent example 
is the observation that broth, even after boiling, if left in the open, would sprout micro-
organisms4. Careful experimental control of environmental and other causal  
influences has repeatedly demonstrated th e process of generating microbes  is not 
spontaneous; for example, experiments with sterilized broth insulated from 
contamination exhibit zero growth of de novo complex, biological forms 1. Likewise, 
many structures human chemists might envisage are so complex  they will never be 
observed to emerge spontaneously within any span of finite time and finite resource. 
This is because the causation mediating their formation does not itself exist.  
 
The observable universe contains ~10 80 atoms. Taxol, a secondary metabolite with 
molecular formula C 47H51N1O14, shown in Figure 1, is one among an estimated ~10100 
possible molecules5 with molecular weight <  1000 Amu. Not all ~10100 possibilities 
will ever exist.  There are  no instantiated mechanisms (catalysts)  for making the 
majority, and there are not enough atoms in the  entire universe to make them all in 
any case. For Taxol, the chance of producing it spontaneously, by joining 47 carbon, 
51 hydrogen, 1 nitrogen and 14 oxygen atoms in the precise 3D arrangement of Taxol, 
3  
  
is far smaller than 1 in 1023 (less than one molecule per mole of sample) with both the 
desired formula and 3D conformation. The  exact, spontaneous probability cannot be 
defined: the size of chemical space is vast and not computable, and it cannot ever be 
fully explored to assign probabilities to all possible structures within it.  
 
Figure 1. Taxol’s chemical structure with formula C47H51N1O14. The molecular weight 
is 853.91 g/mol, and with 11 chiral centres there are 211 or 2048 possible stereoisomers, 
which likely drastically underestimates the number of molecular structures with this 
same molecular formula. 
 
Using ~10100 as a lower bound on the number of possibilities in the space indicates the 
expected spontaneous molar concentration is so low that human chemists should 
never observe Taxol, if it formed solely via spontaneous generation and an ergodic 
sampling of chemica l space. In bark extracts  from the Pacific yew tree , Taxol is 
abundant with a concentration ~20 ug g -1 of bark ( ca. 1016 molecules g -1). Copies of 
Taxol are reliably synthesized as a secondary metabolite within Pacific yew bark, itself 
the product of billions of years of evolution constructing a specific organism that can 
itself construct Taxol. For Taxol, both the biosynthetic, and also semi - and fully 
synthetic route for its synthesis are known6–8.  
 
How could we know Taxol must be the product of an evolutionary lineage, if we did 
not know anything about how it was made? This is one and the same as Paley’s famous 
question about  how one might determine  design in a watch9, but here applied to 
molecules as more tractable physical objects of study.  
 
O
O
O
H
N
O
HO
HOO
O
O
O
O
OH
O
O
4  
  
Paley intended his watch argument to be in  favour of a theological explanation for 
design in nature. An alternative view is that the appearance of design , without a 
designer, can be explained naturalistically via scientific methods. Darwin’s “struggle 
for existence” introduced natural selection as an explanation for some features of 
organic design10, via the mechanism of survival of the fittest. But natural selection is a 
passive filter, culling already -created forms to leave only the most persistent 
(adapted).  
 
A focus only on  existing forms misses most of the causal work selection does. For 
example, it does not account for how new form s arise, nor why evolution has 
discovered so many new, often complex forms so rapidly 11. Existing theories do not 
explain why new lineages emerge, or the major transitions that branch them into 
radically different forms, including transitions in substrate 3. Two significant 
transitions are the emergence of biolog ical lineages from  geochemistry12, and the 
emergence of technolog ical lineages  from biology 13, where both biological and 
technological lineages also have many branches 14.  As Krakauer has pointed out, 
explaining design encompasses many of the goals of the emergence of  complexity 
science in the last century (see early work by Simon15), which is unified across its many 
applications as a field studying designed objects16. These include those of biological, 
technological, or even alien (if these exist) origin.   
 
Assembly theory  (AT) introduces a standardiz able, physical scale for constructed 
complexity by elevating causal possibilities to the status of a physical space, the 
assembly space 17, which can be metrologically explored 18. Within this space, objects 
are defined by their assembly index, the minimum causal steps necessary to construct 
them. Assembly space makes it possible to quantify a threshold, below which objects 
form spontaneously, and above which specific selective circumstances , the kind 
known only to arise through extant evolutionary or intelligent lineages, are necessary 
for an object to exist and be measured. Thus, AT provides a theoretical framework that 
5  
  
allows experimental tests of whether objects like Taxol are objectively ones that cannot 
form spontaneously. AT’s principles can be tested as a general theory of causation  in 
substrates beyond molecules.  
 
Here, to introduce the core concepts, we demonstrate the existence of a well -defined 
upper limit to what is abiotically possible , relying only on a  few, reasonable 
assumptions. We start with a theoretical proof of an abiotic upper bound in assembly 
space and its relationship to experimental tests. We use this as a segue into explaining 
AT’s implications as a theory of physics , where causation is a definable and 
measurable property.  
 
Assembly Threshold Demarcating Life 
In AT, each distinguishable  object, 𝑜𝑖 , is defined as a physical entity that is (1) 
countable, (2) finite, and (3) can be disassembled (or assembled) by a finite sequence 
of recursive steps (see Sharma et al. 17). Thought experiments on the realizability of 
chemical space suggest the e xistence of objects cannot be  taken a s given a priori , 
because we do not observe all possible objects (and never will). In AT, we assume as a 
principle of physics that c ausation is necessary to the existence of objects.  AT starts 
from the quantification of assembly index, 𝑎𝑖, specific to each distinguishable object 
type, 𝑖, and defined as the minimum number of causal steps necessary for that object 
to exist, where steps are built recursively. Recursive construction of objects defines the 
assembly space, delineating the set of all possible causal structures. Here causation 
emerges in the application of physical constraints that must be present in the object’s 
environment; an example is how catalysis can direct the formation of a chemical bond 
to make a specific molecular object.  
 
Observing countabl y many copies, 𝑛𝑖, of an object indicates a causal mechanism is 
persistent enough to produce them  reliably, which must be  run from a n extant 
6  
  
memory that applies constraints in the assembly space. That is, any object persisting 
in environments for timescales longer than its natural half -life (timescale to decay), 
implies the object is constructed, and therefore can be constructed again19. A 
mechanism was selected that itself persists in the environment, which allows its 
reproduction (sometimes referred to in the abstract as a constructor, see e.g. von 
Neumann20 or Deutsch21).  This point is nuanced. For example, a molecule’s half-life is 
controlled by its environment. If the environment includes conditions causing the 
molecule to react with other things (e.g., oxidation, reduction on Earth), this can cause 
the molecule to decompose over time. All organic matter will eventually decay to CO2 
and H2O because these are the thermodynamically most stable products 22. Yet, some 
molecular structures, like ribosomes 23, have persisted on Earth for billions of years.  
Deeper memory leads to  contingency and allows the production of copies of more 
intricate objects, that is, those with larger assembly indices.  
 
Together, copy number and assembly index allow quantifying a threshold in assembly 
space, below which objects might form spontaneously, and above which specific 
selective circumstances , the kind known only to persist in  extant evolutionary or 
intelligent lineages, are necessary for an object to exist and be measured. 
 
Here, we formalize our central argument. We consider two classes of objects 
elucidated by the example of Taxol: some objects are spontaneous because they can 
form in abundance when conditions allow, and other objects are selected because they 
require very specific circumstances for their formation against a combinatorially 
explosive set of possibilities. Selected objects must form along a lineage or causal chain 
specific to their formation. A key conjecture of AT is that this division is not only a 
feature of the processes making these objects, but of the objects themselves. 
 
Our formal argument uses a very simplified mathematical example. Although simple, 
it demonstrates key principles of AT as a constructivist theory of physics, where no 
7  
  
sufficiently high assembly  index object can exist in the absence of a selective 
mechanism for its causal construction.  
 
Assume it takes 𝑎  causal steps to construct an object (where 𝑎  is in assembly time, 
see17). Here, a causal step is defined minimally, as in the joining of two structures to 
make a new one. In a combinatorial, recursive ly constructible space, the number of 
possible objects formed in successi ve of such events  will grow super-exponentially. 
We assume a branching factor, 𝑏 , to parameterize this growth, which is substrate 
specific.  
 
We classify indistinguishable but countable objects by type, 𝑖, where types are defined 
based on their distinguishability, such that the number of copies, 𝑛𝑖, of a given type 
corresponds to the countable number of  objects of that type,  up to limits of 
measurement. The branching factor, 𝑏𝑖, for a given object type, 𝑖, is then the size of the 
set of other  structures that can be formed in one recursive causal step , using only 
products of preceding causal joins along a causal chain . We simplify to a global 𝑏, 
uniform across all structures for what follows, to allow us to illustrate our key points 
more straightforwardly. We expect our models presented to drastically underestimate 
the size of the assembly space: in physical samples we expect 𝑏 to be object-dependent 
and increase with assembly index (e.g., branching adopts a form that is object-specific 
and scales with assembly index, for example, of the form 𝑏𝑖(𝑎𝑖)) leading to much more 
explosive combinatorial growth in the number of possibilities in real materials.  
 
Recursion is a necessary  axiom for  a physics that does not allow spontaneous 
generation of arbitrarily complex objects : this is because , in the absence of 
spontaneous existence,  the only way to make new objects is to use preceding 
structures in a causal chain. This also implicates microphysical causation as necessary 
to the physics we aim to describe . The exponential, combinatorial explosion of the 
8  
  
space of possibilities with each step means there will always be a finite threshold for 
the causal depth of what objects can exist.   
 
Assembly Threshold Theorem: A recursive causal  threshold exists for all  finite, 
combinatorial physical systems. Let 𝑁𝑇 be the total number of countable objects in a 
sample, 𝑏  the substrate-dependent branching factor  (here taken globally  for 
simplicity), and 𝑀 the instrument resolution defining the minimum number of copies 
necessary to register  a measurement of an object . We denote the threshold defining 
the maximum assembly index of an object that can be measured in multiple copies in 
the absence of selection as 𝑎𝑀. This is bounded by: 
              (1) 
𝑎𝑀 = 1 +
ln [M] −   ln[(1 − 1
𝑏)𝑁𝑇 + 1
𝑏]
ln[1
𝑏]
 
 
Proof: For an object to exist and be measured, at least 𝑀 copies must form. Assuming 
there exists a total number, 𝑁𝑇 , of objects of any kind, the expected number of 
countable objects, 〈𝑛(𝑎)〉, requiring 𝑎 steps for their formation is: 
(2) 
〈𝑛(𝑎)〉 =  
(1
𝑏)
𝑎
∑(1
𝑏)
𝑎
𝑎
 𝑁𝑇 
Where 𝑏𝑎  captures how many branches can be followed , along 𝑎  causal joins , with 
𝑑(𝑎)=  (
1
𝑏)
𝑎
  the number density of  distinguishable object types (terminus of all 
branches) after 𝑎 steps. The sum ∑(
1
𝑏)
𝑎
𝑎  provides the normalization to maintain the 
physical constraint that t he sum over all expected copy numbers is the finite total 
number of objects 𝑁𝑇 (e.g. ∑𝑛(𝑎) =  𝑁𝑇). We assume all branches are followed, that is, 
there is no selection. Since the space of objects is branching , the number density will 
drop off exponentially with the number of steps. For finite 𝑁𝑇, there will be a value of 
9  
  
𝑎  where the expected number of objects is 〈𝑛(𝑎)〉 <  𝑀 , such that objects requiring 
more steps than 𝑎  cannot be observed because the expansion of combinatorial 
possibilities is too vast and they can only exist in copy numbers below detection limits. 
Setting 〈𝑛(𝑎𝑀)〉 = 𝑀, in Eq. 2, and solving for 𝑎𝑀 gives the threshold  (see Appendix 
B). The argument is sufficiently general to apply to any recursively constructed 
combinatorial space: with finite resource s, all such spaces will exhaust populating 
possibilities in a finite number of recursive steps.  
 
Here we introduced a forward assembly process for object construction, defining an 
assembly time 𝑎 , as the number of discrete causal, constructive steps 17. In general, 
assembly time (the number of steps in a forward assembly process terminating on an 
object) is not equivalent to assembly index. Nonetheless, Eq. 1 gives us a fundamental 
bound on assembly index, because the assembly time to make an object can never be 
less than that object’s assembly index. Eq. 1 thus demonstrates that, absent selection, 
any object we observe must be possible to form within a set of causal joins equal to 𝑎𝑀, 
or less, setting a fundamental causal bound on the possibility of an object to exist and 
be measured. Since assembly index is the minimum causal depth for each object, the 
value of 𝑎𝑀 tells us what objects cannot form  without selection, that is objects with 
𝑎𝑖 >  𝑎𝑀 cannot form abiotically. Such a bound will hold if microphysical causation is 
a real feature of our universe, such that all objects have a partial ordering on what can 
exist (e.g., an object cannot be assembled unless the parts to assemble it are themselves 
already assembled).  
 
By the for egoing, in a sample of 𝑁𝑇 countable objects, those with an assembly index 
𝑎𝑖 > 𝑎𝑀 will have an expected copy number < 𝑀, meaning they cannot exist  and be 
measured without some prior constraints in the branching process . T hat is , they 
cannot exist and be observed without selection. The parameter 𝑀 quantifies 𝑎𝑀 as an 
epistemological limit, set by the resolution of our measuring devices. In the limit 𝑀 →
1, where the resolution of measurement is exactly one object, the threshold 𝑎𝑀 becomes 
10  
  
an ontological limit, 𝑎1. This captures the maximum expected assembly index for the 
existence of any object , where 〈𝑛(𝑎1)〉 = 1. For most systems of interest, due to the 
exponential branching of the space, the epistemological and ontological limits will be 
quite close (see e.g., Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. The expected copy number of objects at a given causal depth, quantified in 
assembly time, 𝑎, for varying volumes of total material. For the curves shown, 𝑁𝑇 =
1023 (1 mole of material), 𝑁𝑇 = 1050 (approximate number of atoms composing the 
Earth), 𝑁𝑇 = 1080  (approximate number of atoms in the observable universe). The 
value of the branching factor, 𝑏 , was set using the experimentally determined 
threshold value of 𝑎𝑀 = 15  determined in Marshall et al. 24 (dashed line) , where no 
molecules with assembly indices 𝑎𝑖  >  15 were detected in molar samples of 
abiotically-derived material, with a detection limit of approximately 10,000 molecules 
in the mass spectrometer used in the measurements . Using Eq 1. with 𝑎𝑀 = 15, 𝑁𝑇 =
1023  (~1 mole), and 𝑀 = 10,000  yields an approximate averaged global branching 
over small molecule organic chemical space of 𝑏~25 from our simple model. With 𝑏 =
25, we can extrapolate to different volumes of material, to determine the  scaling of a 
threshold value of 𝑎𝑀  where the ontological bound is achieved , that is where  
〈𝑛(𝑎𝑀=1)〉 = 1 . For a molar sample of abiotic material  𝑎1(1023) ~ 18 , the planetary 
bound is 𝑎1(1050) ~ 37 for an abiotic system with roughly as many molecules as there 
are atoms on Earth, and the cosmological bound is 𝑎1(1080) ~ 58 for an abiotic system 
with roughly as many molecules as there are atoms in the observable universe. 
Although these are very rough estimates,  this demonstrates the existence of a 
cosmological bound and implies it is possible to extrapolate from laboratory based 

11  
  
measurements to make predictions such that  any molecule with  𝑎𝑖  >  𝑎1(1080) ~ 58 
is a signature of a deep causal history of evolution and selection ; these cannot form 
spontaneously even leveraging the volume of the entire universe.  
 
The branching factor satisfies 𝑏 ≥ 1, where the limiting case 𝑏 → 1 occurs only if each 
object can undergo only one causal join and can make only one new possible object. 
In chemical space, where the combinatorics of new bond formation scales at least  
exponentially with the molecular size, 𝑏 is expected to scale exponentially with 𝑎𝑖, and 
the bound presented herein is a gross underestimate of the combinatorics. However, 
given that experimental data suggest only small 𝑎𝑖  molecules exist abiotically 18, a 
constant 𝑏 provides a reasonable first approximation.   
 
The ontological threshold, 𝑎1 , defines a natural division between spontaneous and 
selected objects, with important implications (here 𝑖 indexes distinguishable objects): 
1. Objects with assembly index , 𝑎𝑖 , below the threshold ( 𝑎𝑖 < 𝑎1 ) can arise 
spontaneously and could exist in abundance anywhere conditions permit. 
2. Objects with assembly index above the threshold ( 𝑎𝑖 > 𝑎1 ) require specific 
causal histories and cannot arise without selection. 
3. Observing high copy numbers of high assembly objects ( 𝑎𝑖 > 𝑎1, 𝑛𝑖 > 𝑀) is a 
signature of selection along a deep causal lineage. 
 
The threshold is weakly system-size dependent, see Figure 2 (e.g., it does not change 
by even one order of magnitude going from laboratory to cosmological scales) . The 
dependence on the number of countable objects in a sample renders 𝑎𝑀 an extensive 
physical variable, which is both  substrate dependent (via branching, 𝑏 ) and volume 
dependent (via system  size, 𝑁𝑇 ).  This allows setting bounds on 𝑎𝑀  for laboratory 
samples, and using this to determine planetary and cosmological bounds, see Figure 
2. The cosmological molecular bound considers an upper limit on the number of 
countable molecules in the observable universe using the estimated number of atoms 
12  
  
(𝑁𝑇 ∼ 1080), which suggests that any molecule observed in abundance with  𝑎𝑖  ≳  58 
must be a signature of a deep causal history of evolution and selection; these cannot 
form spontaneously even leveraging the countable volume of the entire universe. For 
reasons stated , we expect this to be an overestimate, in particular because (1) the 
assembly space grows much faster than accounted for here , (2) the number of 
molecules in the universe will be smaller than the number of atoms, with the number 
possible decreasing with molecular weight, and (3) the mass is distributed over the 
entire universe and not within a reaction volume. Future work can include more 
realistic assumptions, and more experimental data, leading to tighter bounds and 
predictions from the theory. Our  example here is intended to be simple  enough to 
show a critical role for both assembly index and copy number, combined with  an 
ontology of microphysical causation , as necessary to defining a  universal threshold 
for detection of the constructive causal lineages more colloquially referred to as ‘life’ 
and/or ‘intelligence’.  
 
Assembly Space 
The above argument is well-defined within assembly space. Assembly space defines 
all possible objects constructible from basic units via recursive causal joining steps24, 
and all the pathways connecting them. That is, assembly space encodes causal 
possibilities as a physical space that can be metrologically explored . In AT, the 
assembly space is a physical space that objects exist in, just as objects exist in spacetime 
in more familiar physics. Assembly spaces are substrate specific18,25–27, which we shall 
discuss in more detail later, here we introduce a general definition, following28. 
 
Definition 1 - Assembly Space. An assembly space (𝛺, 𝑈, 𝐽) consists of,  𝛺, its set of 
possible objects , 𝑈 ⊂ 𝛺 , the  set of elementary units for assembling objects, and 
possible causal joins 𝐽: 𝛺 × 𝛺 × 𝛺 → {0,1}, where 𝐽(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 1 indicates the causal join 
can happen such that objects 𝑥 and 𝑦 can be assembled to form object 𝑧, e.g., {𝑥, 𝑦}  →
13  
  
𝑧. The assembly space 𝛺 is the closure of 𝑈 under all joining operations 𝐽, meaning 𝛺 
contains all possible objects that can be constructed from  the set of  basic units 𝑈 
through any sequence of  possible causal joins. For combinatorial , compositional  
spaces, like chemical space , languages, memes, and morphologies , the full assembly 
space is not computable and not physically realizable. What we can know about the  
structure of assembly space is determined by deconstructing (fragmenting) observed 
objects.  
 
The assembly space  has several important properties. It is  combinatorially 
constructed, such that many parts can combine in many ways. It is recursive, such that 
objects are only possible to assemble with the products of preceding steps along causal 
chains. These features establish assembly space as a causal possibility space and one that 
unifies both dynamics and objects, which have traditionally been considered distinct 
in other physical ontologies. See, for example, Walker and Davies29 for a discussion of 
a need to unify states and dynamical laws to arrive at a physics descriptive of life. AT 
collapses the distinction between the two. The structure of the assembly space makes 
no distinction between sequences of causal joins and the objects they assemble; objects 
are causal chains.  
 
Possible futures are causally open and undetermined, but the possible past is causally 
closed and trapped in existing objects. Consistent with this physics,  what can be 
known about what is possible can only be determined from existing objects. Thus, the 
assembly space is derived from the deconstruction of objects : the units and joining 
operations are determined via recursive fragmentation of observed objects. We define 
fragmentation as the process of splitting an object into two parts , e.g., 𝑧 → {𝑥, 𝑦} . By 
symmetry and invariance of physical laws 30, the inverse causal operations of joining 
the two objects must then also be possible, defining the joining operations and the 
assembly space , see, e.g. Marshall for molecular assembly space 18,31. We note the 
physical circumstances in the environment mediating a fragmenting process or joining 
14  
  
process need not be strictly equivalent, for example it may require human -level 
intelligence to make a highly symmetric DNA nanostructure, but the molecule could 
be broken by the ordinary process of phosphate ester hydrolysis. Thus, the symmetry 
of causati on we invoke here does not imply that the reverse (fragmentation) and 
forward (joining) environmental constraints  are symmetric (see e.g., Marletto and 
Vedral for an example of similar asymmetry in fundamental physics32). Instead, here 
symmetry and invariance imply that the causation in the material 
(fragmenting/joining) is symmetric. One arrives at units when an object produced by 
a particular mechanism of fragmentation (e.g., by breaking bonds) can be fragmented 
no further by that same mechanism, defining the boundary of a ‘substrate’ in AT. The 
causal symmetry within objects  has potentially deep implications for this physics 
given the connection between invariance and symmetry33, a subject we leave to future 
work.  
 
To uncover the structure of assembly space, two requirements are necessary. First, one 
must identify the bounded, distinguishable structures of a  substrate, defining its 
objects. Second, a measurement scheme must be identified that can interrogate how 
objects can be fragmented recursively to units. From units, paths are re-assembled via 
causal joins to find the minimum number of steps to arrive at the observed objects.  
 
Consistent with the definition of o bjects in AT (see Sharma et al. 17), what we call 
‘objects’ in the assembly space are strictly those observed to exist in high enough copy 
number to be measurable34. Thus, it is the termination of lineages of causal steps in the 
assembly space, where there is a high copy number at the terminus, which is definitive 
of the objects we observe , see Figure 3.  All other structure in the assembly space is 
what we call ‘virtual objects’: their identity is defined based on the existence of objects, 
e.g., via the process of fragmenting those objects and re -assembling them. Virtual 
objects have no autonomous existence, because there does not necessarily exist a 
causal mechanism that can pro duce identical, countable copies of these structures in 
15  
  
high numbers. Using mass spectrometry as an example , for complex molecules , 
millions of fragments might be produced for an individual molecule, and it is not 
necessarily the case that any one of these can be generated reliably.  Nonetheless we 
can infer the existence of the assembly space via these fragments, as virtual 
manifestations of it.  
 
The definition of an assembly space is predicated on objects being deconstruct ible in 
a finite sequence of causal steps. In the prevailing conception21 of reductionist physics, 
breaking apart physical systems is understood to reveal something of the physics that 
binds objects into higher -order structure. For example, removing electrons from an 
atom reveals properties of Coulomb interactions between the negative electrons and 
the positively charged nucleus. This has led to a standard  explanatory interpretation 
in the form of  physical laws that exist outside of objects and somehow dictate their 
behaviour35, leaving open the question of what ‘breathes fire’ into these equations to 
yield a universe for them to describe, as articulated by Hawking36. In AT, we view the 
reductionist insight differently, as it reveals a more general property of all objects our 
universe constructs: the causal constraints from which an object can be assembled are 
intrinsic to that object. T here are no external ‘laws’ . This sets the foundation for 
defining the assembly index as an intrinsic measure of causation, leading to assembly 
index as a  proposal for complexity as an ontological propert y (see, e.g., Lloyd 37 for 
other categories organizing prior approaches to complexity across different fields).  
 
Causation 
An axiom of AT is that objects require a causal sequence of steps to exist. Indeed, objects 
are a causal sequence of steps. T hus, there must be a minimum number of steps as  a 
necessary property for the existence of a ny object. As we have noted, this  physical 
property of each distinguishable object type, 𝑖, is quantified by its assembly index, 𝑎𝑖. 
Assembly index  is an intensive property, subject to measurement , independent of 
16  
  
formation history , system size , or measurement method  (see section on 
measurement). We now define it more formally28.   
 
Definition 2 - Assembly Path and Assembly Index . An assembly path is a finite 
sequence of causal joins , {(𝑥1, 𝑦1, 𝑧1), . . . , (𝑥𝑛, 𝑦𝑛, 𝑧𝑛)}  that satisfy: ∀𝑖 ∈ {1,2, . . . , 𝑛} , 
𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖 ∈ 𝑈 ∪ {𝑧1, 𝑧2, . . . , 𝑧𝑖−1}  and 𝐽(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖)= 1  . That is, for any object 𝑧 ∈ Ω , an 
assembly pathway for 𝑧 is defined as a finite directed acyclic graph whose leaves are 
labelled by elements of 𝑈, whose internal nodes represent causal join operations 𝐽, and 
whose join operations in the pathway ultimately produce a single final object 𝑧. For 
any object, 𝑧 ⊂ 𝛺 , the assembly index of that object, denoted 𝑎𝑖(𝑧) , is the number of 
causal joins along  a shortest assembly path that has 𝑧  as its final product. If 
{(𝑥1, 𝑦1, 𝑧1), . . . , (𝑥𝑛, 𝑦𝑛, 𝑧𝑛)}  is a shortest assembly path for 𝑧 , then 𝑎𝑖(𝑧) = 𝑛 . For a 
canonical choice of primitives, composition rules, and object equivalence, the 
assembly index is a well-defined property of the object. 
 
While it is simple to write out an assembly pathway as a labelled sequence, doing this 
in a causally relevant way to reveal the structure of the assembly space is non-trivial. 
Joining operations in an assembly space are substrate -specific and must encode 
causation as it operates in that substrate . For example, in molecular assembly space, 
hydrogen atoms are typically not treated as explicit assembly primitives, because 
including them adds substantial combinatorial complexity without increasing 
discriminatory power in practical measurement or in the calculation of molecular 
assembly index28, but for atmospheric assembly space they are critical27. The assembly 
space of solid state materials has yet a different structure25.  
 
The formalization of assembly index captures: 
(1)  Causation. Assembly index counts the minimum number of  causes (joining 
operations) to produce the object. 
17  
  
(2) Contingency. Only structures constructed along an assembly path are available 
for recursive use to construct subsequent objects. 
(3) Invariance. Assembly index does not depend on the identity of causal joins or 
their precise ordering, only the shortest countable number to assemble an 
object, which is a path-independent feature of the object. 
The assembly space introduces a material and intrinsic concept of causation , because 
it encodes the direct influence of one component on another’s possible existence, see 
Figure 3.   
 
Figure 3. Assembly pathways reveal the materiality of causation, where each object 
within an assembly space exists as a sequence of causal joins on a minimum path 

18  
  
where we observe a high copy number at the terminus. Shown is a minimum assembly 
path for Taxol, which has 23 steps.  
 
This dissolves issues inherent to counterfactual definitions of cause 38,39, such as the 
need to iterate over interventions that cannot be fully specified or computed. The 
restriction of steps along an assembly path to joining operations implicates these as 
fundamental units of causation, and yields a precisely defined, and material, concept 
of ‘cause’. Causes are structures that appear on a minimal path to construct an  
observed object. It  is worth noting that these structures are causal joins of two 
fragments, that these are not a priori labelled, and that their precise identity as virtual 
structures need not be known.  
 
A causal join must exist before its product can be used, imposing a measurable partial 
ordering on the existence of objects with testable consequences . This yields an 
ontology where objects include causal extent as a material attribute. Complex objects 
of the kind we interact with in biology and technology are effectively hyper -objects, 
as their assembly space, or lineage, is large in its causal depth. 
 
It is not trivial to determine what set of circumstances allows one object to exist over 
another40. The mediators of c ontingent causal chains are sometimes referred to as 
‘constructors’20,21, but this concept is often so abstract as to be poorly defined . Many 
constructors of interest are too widely distributed in space and time to be useful for 
theoretical and empirical interrogation. For example, the (symbolic) laws of 
gravitation are a component of the constructor necessary for artificial satellites to orbit 
Earth, but this constructor also includes engineers, factories, rocket propellant , and a 
myriad of non-iterable, but finite, other objects that exist in our biosphere 3. 
Constructors can be massively distributed in space and time, often hidden from our 
direct perception (for example, often we do not recognize math, symbols, or languages 
as physical objects41). 
19  
  
The universe itself is one such concept – we will never observe all of it at once (being 
contained within it), so we will only ever be able to discuss it in the abstract. In this 
sense, the very idea of “universe” is itself an emergent property of all the causation 
we can observe constructing things into being. Measuring causation that is large in its 
spatial and temporal extent presents a challenge, and , indeed, is at the heart of the 
challenge in measuring the emergence of new lineages from non-living substrates (the 
origin of life). In AT, we recognize it is not possible to precisely define nor measure the 
presence of large constructors directly. It is possible to measure the shadow of a 
constructor in the object(s) it generates (see also discussion on the connection between 
AT’s concept of cause and Derrida’s deconstructivist concept of trace , as explored by 
Mastrogiovanni42). 
 
Constructors are not physical in a material sense, but assembly spaces are. Attempts 
to formalize life have frequently focused on immaterial concepts of information43. AT 
is the first to define the physics as material and does so by recognizing causal 
possibilities as a physical space, the assembly space. This underlies AT’s unique 
definition of material causation. It introduces an ontology where hierarchy is defined 
in terms of  the possibility to exist, radically departing from notions of hierarchy 
defined by spatial or energetic scales found in other theories (see Ardoline44).  
 
Contingency 
Observing any distinguishable object in discrete copies provides direct evidence that 
the universe contains a causal mechanism to produce (and reproduce) that same 
object. Copy number is evidence of stored memory. This is distinct from frequentist 
approaches to probabi lity, where frequency is used as evidence that something is 
likely45 (see Appendix A). Copy number allows the formalizing of contingency along 
causal chains within the assembly space by capturing dependency on prior selective 
steps.  
20  
  
Definition 3 - Copy number . Copy number, 𝑛𝑖 , is the countable number of each 
distinguishable object type, 𝑖, (defined up to limits of measurement).  
 
In AT, copy number is not related to the probability of the object occurring, which is, 
in general, not definable  (see Appendix A). Instead, copy number is  an indication of 
contingency in the causal chain that allows the object to exist at all. This is sufficiently 
important that it is a principle of AT: 
 
Copy Number (CN) Principle. Countable copies of a distinguishable object type is 
direct evidence of contingency along the causal chain mediating the object’s existence. 
 
The copy number  (CN) principle is inclusive of mechanisms that are spontaneous. 
Processes that can occur everywhere (spontaneously) are often captured by what we 
call “physical laws” that aim to explain such universal regularities. But the CN 
principle is broader than universal laws in physics, because it also applies to all non-
universal causal regularities, inclusive of high assembly index objects and not just the 
low assembly index ones. Some mechanisms of causation (indeed most if we consider 
the full space  of possibilities ) are  contingent and  not spontaneous, and they are 
therefore not found everywhere in the universe. Ribosomes provide evidence of one 
such local causal regularity or ‘law -like’ process that may only exist on Earth: the 
constructive context known as a biological cell. Ribosomes have persisted in high copy 
numbers on this planet for billions of years 46 because there is a localized physical 
system (the cell) that allows their reliable, reproducible construction.  The copy 
number of ribosomes on Earth is not evidence of the  universal probability of their 
formation, but instead is evidence of a contingent causal chain persisting on Earth (see 
Appendix A). 
 
21  
  
Measurement  
Although it is now common knowledge as a statement of scientific fact that water boils 
at 100°C, this statement is not true of the world. Water boils at slightly different 
temperatures if it is in a glass container versus a metal one, if it is aerated or not, 
depending on the altitude you are at, etc. The standardized temperature scale came 
about because of the invention of a theoretical abstraction, the concept of absolute 
zero, originally defined as a fundamental limit to the degree of coldness possible47. By 
reference to this theoretical limit, all other (hotter) objects can have their relative 
temperature defined precisely.  This scale works even if absolute zero is not a 
physically attainable temperature. 
 
What if there could be a similar  standardization, not for a temperature scale, but for 
the measurement of causation? The assembly index is structured to provide such a 
standardization, such that each object 𝑎𝑖, and the substrate-specific and measurement 
specific 𝑎𝑀, can be determined experimentally. We will describe the metrology of AT 
as developed for molecules as a special first case of application of the metrology of the 
theory.  
 
For molecules, measurements have been done using techniques where the number of 
parts within a molecule can be determined using standard laboratory methods, like 
infrared (IR) spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, and 
mass spectrometry (MS) 48. These techniques rely on different types of experimental 
data, yet each have been found to give evidence for the direct measurement of 
molecular assembly index.  
 
Assembly theory was first developed by one of us (Cronin) via thought experiments 
about measuring causation in molecules using mass spectrometry. In a chemistry lab, 
mass spectrometry is a common technique for identifying molecules and measuring 
22  
  
their properties 49. This works by  shattering molecules  into fragments , giving 
characteristic patterns for specific molecules based on the charge -to-mass ratio of the 
fragments produced . Thought experiments leading to the development of the 
assembly index were inspired by this fragmentation process, and how one could  
reassemble a molecule in successive steps by sticking  the fragments back together, 
ensuring any redundancies are removed to guarantee the smallest number of joins18,24. 
If some fragments are identical and can be reused, fewer total steps  are necessary to 
reassemble the original molecule. This is indicative of the inherent, physical hierarchy 
in how to count constructive complexity that came to underlie the assembly index as 
a measure of intrinsic causation.  
 
This process mirrors the formalism of assembly space and the assembly index, so it is 
tempting to say that assembly index is just a correlate of  the mass spec trometry 
fragmentation. However, this is demonstrably not the case. For a given molecule, the 
complete quantum state (or equivalently its ground -state) contains all information 
about bonding, connectivity, symmetry, and repetition . This can be ‘read-out’ by the 
spectroscopic techniques of mass spectrometry, NMR, and Infrared. Any of t hese 
techniques can be implemented to determine assembly index  because the assembly 
index is a functional of th e quantum  state of the molecule,  which measures the 
minimum generative description length of the molecular graph under physically 
allowed composition rule s. Before AT, this functional was simply not identified, 
formalized, or measured. What makes assembly index new is not that it adds 
information to quantum mechanics, but that it selects a particular invariant that had 
no prior analogue in physics. The assembly index is global, not local (unlike energy, 
charge density, or force constants), it is non -extensive (copying a module does not 
increase it linearly), and it is algorithmic, not additive. The assembly index is observer-
independent once the construction  rules are fixed. Finally, it is experimentally 
accessible through lossy projections (IR, MS, NMR) without full structure 
reconstruction48. This is why IR, MS, and NMR can all be used to measure the 
23  
  
assembly index, using radically different physical mechanisms and instrumentation. 
These techniques  are not measuring the same thing directly; they are  however all 
projecting the quantum state through different symmetry , and redundancy  
preserving, channels. The same scalar emerges robustly across these orthogonal 
probes providing the strongest evidence to date  that assembly index  captures 
something intrinsic rather than an artefact or some kind of heuristic.  This provides a 
newly identified intrinsic physical invariant of molecular structures, consistent with 
quantum mechanics but not recognized, nor experimentally operationalized until the 
advent of AT.  
 
Thus, via the assembly index, the concept of ‘causation’ in AT becomes a feature like 
charge, spin, or other quantum numbers, or the speed of light 𝑐. It does not depend 
on the object’s environment, reference frame, or measuring device.  Although this is a 
strong claim, it has been rigorously tested. If the assembly index were not intrinsic, it 
would depend strongly on representation, spectroscopy choice, or observer -
dependent assumptions. The empirical fact that it survives IR, MS, and NMR, all with 
different physics, different noise, and different symmetries, suggests invariance48.  
 
This invariance is critical to the metrological standardization of constructed 
complexity of molecules, which is a necessary step towards experimental confirmation 
of an abiotic upper limit setting a threshold for life detection. To confirm a threshold, 
measurements must be taken for objects derived from living and non-living samples, 
with an understanding that the threshold value is system size dependent, 𝑎𝑀(𝑁𝑇). For 
a laboratory mass spectrometer, the copy number of identical molecules sets a 
detection limit of 𝑀 ≅  10,000 because this is the lower limit of detection, see Figure 
4.  We show this detection limit set against the abiotic assembly copy number 
distribution in Figure 4 , showing how determination of an abiotic threshold in 
assembly space depends on both system size and instrument resolution. The existence 
of a threshold has been demonstrated experimentally in Marshall et al.18 
24  
  
 
Figure 4:  The epistemological limit set by  a measurement device determines the 
maximum assembly index object expected to be observed in the absence of selection. 
Shown is the measurement resolution for a mass spectrometer, where a minimum of 
M = 10,000 identical molecular objects must be present (horizontal red dashed line), 
relative to the abiotic copy number distribution for laboratory scale samples ranging 
from 1/1000th of a mole to 1,000 mole. As in Fig. 2, we set 𝑏 = 25 to be consistent with 
experimental measurements in Marshall et al. 24, which set the limits of detection of 
abiotic molecular complexity at 𝑎𝑀 = 15  (vertical, black dashed line)  in molar 
samples. In Fig 2., there is no measurement cut -off, but here we show how the tail of 
the distribution will be  below the measurement cu t-off for most experiments , 
rendering the two distinct phases (spontaneous or abiotic, versus selected or life) more 
obviously distinguishable by an abrupt discontinuity (see e.g. Marshall et al. 24 where 
the cutoff at 𝑎𝑖 = 15 is abrupt). For the simple model presented, a value of 𝑎𝑀~18 is 
expected for experiments on abiotic systems with 103 mol of material, a prediction 
which should be refined with more detailed analyses of the structure of molecular 
assembly space and its branching.  
 
 
Selection 
We are now in a position to define the assembly of a system, which quantifies the total 
amount of selection among causal possibilities required to generate and maintain all 
objects in the system. It combines both the material causation of objects (assembly 
index) and the evidence of persistent contingent causal mechanisms (copy number), 

25  
  
allowing a formalization of phases of matter associated with abiotic and living (or 
intelligent) objects.  
 
We call the configuration of causa l possibilities intrinsic to a collection of objects  an 
assemblage, where the total causation is quantified by its Assembly as: 
(3) 
𝐴 = 1
𝑁𝑇
∑ 𝑛𝑖 𝑒𝑎𝑖
𝑖:𝑛𝑖>1
 
 
where 𝑛𝑖 is the copy number and 𝑎𝑖 is the assembly index of the 𝑖𝑡ℎ distinguishable 
object type. This equation captures how producing few copies of a complex object 
requires more selection and contingency along causal lineages, than producing many 
copies of a simpler object. 
 
A configuration in standard physics is formalized to capture the current position and 
momentum of a system. T his should be considered only as the current time slice of 
that configuration’s assemblage : the assemblage includes the accumulated causal 
possibilities, recursively assembled to generate the configuration. The assemblage is a 
causally deep representation of matter.  
 
We take as an axiom that any  object with assembly index 𝑎𝑖 > 1  cannot be reali zed 
without the existence of objects of lower assembly index along at least one minimal 
assembly pathway; that is, every object observed with assembly index 𝑎𝑖 > 1  exists 
both in the physical objects we count and interact with, and as a virtual space of finite 
support that encodes the underlying causation necessary to its existence.  Each object 
observed implies the realizability of a hierarchy of objects  causally prior to  its 
existence. T he quantity 𝐴  makes this implication explicit, defined by introducing a 
virtual copy number, 𝑣𝑖, that compounds copy number through recursive composition 
of causal chains, e.g., the assembly paths.  To derive this for an observed object , we 
26  
  
start at the base of its assembly space with  an object of zero assembly index carr ying 
a unit weight and add causation equivalent to compounding following all branches 
into the one realized causal join at each step. Over an assembly path terminating at an 
object with assembly index 𝑎𝑖 , each step collapses 𝑏  possibilities, and this yields a 
virtual copy number:    
𝜈𝑖  ∝ (1 +  1
𝑏)
𝑏 𝑎𝑖
 
Here, b is conceptually similar to the branching parameter we described earlier but 
can now be understood as the number of discrete causal steps that could be taken, out 
of all possibilities, for each unit increase in assembly index, recursively compounding 
copy number along contingent chains. This allows quantification of causation in the 
number of possible branches that must have collapsed into each actualized causal join 
over all steps culminating in an object. Now, assembly index plays an analogous role 
to time, with 𝑏 determining how much causation compounds per unit assembly time.  
 
For an observed object of type 𝑖, with 𝑛𝑖 copies, the causation quantified in the virtual 
copy number is weighted by its contingency in the copy number of observed objects 
at its terminus, yielding the virtual copy number  
𝜈𝑖 = 𝑛𝑖 (1 +  1
𝑏)
𝑏 𝑎𝑖
 
 
Earlier we assumed a branching term was finite for each physical object. Here, in the 
virtual parts of assembly space , we must contend  with how the environment is 
unresolved, not deterministic, and not discretized until selection operates to fixate 
specific causal mechanisms  (objects) into existence. Thus, against th is unresolved 
virtual background of causal possibilities 𝑏 → ∞  and the above becomes   
(4) 
𝜈𝑖 = 𝑛𝑖𝑒𝑎𝑖 
 
27  
  
such that the virtual copy number captures how the number of objects observed 
encodes a lineage of selected causation in its virtual objects.  Summing over an entire 
assemblage yields the total virtual copy number of the population: 
𝜈tot = ∑ 𝜈𝑖
𝑖
. 
And finally, the  assembly, 𝐴 , of a population is the  total virtual copy number per 
observed object, 
𝐴 = 𝜈tot
𝑁𝑇
= 1
𝑁𝑇
∑ 𝑛𝑖 𝑒𝑎𝑖
𝑖:𝑛𝑖>1
 
Thus, 𝐴 represents a density in causal depth per observed object. The restriction to 
object types with 𝑛𝑖 > 1 implements the copy-number principle: repeated occurrence 
is necessary to evidence a reproducible, selected causal generative process rather than 
a fluctuating contingency. 
 
Assembly is extensive, and scales with system size  (total number of objects). It is also 
measurable because both 𝑛𝑖  and 𝑎𝑖  can be experimentally determined. It captures 
cumulative selection because it accounts for both the causal depth of objects  in a 
combinatorially explosive space (assembly index)  and the persistence of the 
mechanisms to produce these objects (copy number). 
 
This formulation allows us to quantify when systems undergo transitions from abiotic 
chemistry to life -like behavior. As a system accumulates more complex objects in 
higher copy numbers, its 𝐴 increases. Systems above a critical threshold  in 𝐴 mark a 
phase transition in assembly space,  where some of the 𝑎𝑖  >  𝑎𝑀 , and contingent 
lineages of virtual objects are necessary to support existence . This is when objects we 
observe can be causally deep in the assembly space.  Such objects are expected to 
exhibit properties commonly associated with living and intelligent systems, including 
persistent complex structure, reliable reproduction, and potential  for agential and  
28  
  
open-ended behaviour, features which we regard as arising  because of their deep 
virtualization in the space of causal possibilities. 
 
Open-Ended Evolution, Novelty and the Mechanism of Selection 
Assembly operates on discrete objects whose identities and assembly indices are 
defined retrospectively, while interactions occur in a continuous or unresolved space 
that is not discretised in advance  before selection fixes causal mechanism s. Novelty 
emerges when such interactions produce outcomes that do not map onto existing 
object types. Most such outcomes are transient and leave no causal trace. Persistence 
enables repeated interaction with the same unresolved region of possibility space, 
justifying its discretisation to a new physical object type. Once discretised, the object 
becomes part of extant  causal memory and constrains future interactions. Assembly 
index records the depth of this accumulated causal memory.  This provides a 
mechanism for open -ended evolution, where o pen-endedness emerges from an 
asymmetry between discrete causal memory and an under -resolved environment.  
Open-ended evolution therefore arises not from randomness, but from delayed 
discretisation of continuous interactions filtered by persistence and reuse. 
 
Assembly theory treats a population of objects as a discrete causal memory embedded 
in an undetermined space. Each object 𝑖  is characterised retrospectively by an 
assembly index 𝑎𝑖 ∈ ℕ , the minimum number of joining operations required to 
construct it, and a time -dependent copy number 𝑛𝑖(𝑡) , with 𝑁𝑇(𝑡) = ∑𝑛𝑖𝑖 (𝑡) . 
Assembly index encodes causal depth but does not predict which objects will appear.  
 
Novelty arises when interactions between the current assemblage and its under-
resolved environment generate outcomes not previously present; these outcomes are 
only discretised into new object types if they persist and recur, because only then can 
their identity be indexed and measured. 
29  
  
Depth and persistence are connected via the  virtual copy number. One copy of an 
object at assembly index 𝑎  implies an exponentially growing causal structure  
supporting the existence of the object, so we associate with each object type, 𝑖, a virtual 
copy number 𝜈𝑖(𝑡) = 𝑒𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖(𝑡) . The assembly becomes time -dependent in  the 
normalised virtual burden carried by reproducible objects, 
(4) 
𝐴(𝑡) = ∑ 𝑒𝑎𝑖
𝑖: 𝑛𝑖(𝑡)>1
  𝑛𝑖(𝑡)
𝑁𝑇(𝑡)= 1
𝑁𝑇(𝑡) ∑ 𝜈𝑖
𝑖: 𝑛𝑖(𝑡)>1
(𝑡), 
 
which quantifies how much causation is instantiated per observed object.  
 
A discovered object may exist transiently with 𝑛𝑖(𝑡) > 0 yet remain causally sterile; it 
becomes causally effective only if it persists long enough to be used to propagate 
formation of structure.  This means the object ’s persistence time τ𝑖  must be long 
enough for the copy number to increase , e.g. such that  𝑛𝑖(𝑡)≥ 2 . Causation at 
assembly index 𝑎𝑖 requires this persistence time to exceed the characteristic waiting 
time, 𝜏, for reuse in the combinatorially expanding assembly space  such that  τ𝑖  ≳
𝜏𝑎→𝑎+1. When this condition holds, the virtual copy number causal burden per object 
𝑒𝑎𝑖 implies the causation is trapped  once and reproduced through reuse; when the 
condition fails, the burden must be repaid upon each rediscovery, and the object 
cannot contribute to  propagating causation nor to sustainable growth in assembly 
index. 
 
This leads to an expansion and contraction of the assembly space. When  new objects 
are constructed, they expand the assembly space itself, enabling construction of even 
more complex objects. This can yield a “ratchet” effect where each new object opens 
new possibilities,  and the extinction of objects closes off possibilities . In expansion 
phases, the threshold recedes , allowing spontaneous combination to make more 
complex things th an in the absence of a deep lineage. In contraction phases, the 
30  
  
threshold drops back, returning to the abiotic value in the absence of any deep 
lineages. Thus, the assembly space is not static but dynamic, becoming larger as new 
causal mechanisms emerge and smaller as objects die out. The new causal mechanisms 
cannot be predicted a priori , and mechanisms are only predictable so long as they 
persist.  
 
AT provides a testable mechanism for o pen-endedness follow ing from delayed 
discretisation at the interface between discrete memory and continuous possibility. 
Interactions continually sample an outcome space that cannot be enumerated in 
advance; most outcomes vanish without leaving a trace in 𝐴(𝑡). Those that persist are 
stabilised, labelled as new object types (with 𝑎𝑖  defined only after the fact), and 
incorporated into the assemblage, increasing the mass of reproducible high -𝑎 objects 
and allowing the high-end tail of the assembly -index distribution to ratchet upward 
over time  only under certain selective circumstances (e.g. as governed by the 
persistence time of objects).  
 
Selection acts forward on persistence and copy number, while causation accumulates 
backward through assembly index, and their coupling is made explicit by the joint 
dependence of 𝐴(𝑡) on 𝑎𝑖 and 𝑛𝑖(𝑡). In other words, any genuine, novel, open -ended 
process does not have objects that can be defined before the universe constructs them, 
captured in the ontology of AT in how the assembly space can only be determined 
relative to observed objects. There is no definable, global  assembly space that exists 
outside the objects we observe , enabling a physics describing a universe that is self -
constructing.  
 
Deterministic dynamics and predictability  are emergent properties of the assembly 
space: more objects become predictable as objects grow deeper in the assembly space 
because the space itself will encode more causal mechanisms.  Many physical 
31  
  
processes can be simulated algorithmically after the fact, but open-ended evolutionary 
processes cannot be fully characterised as closed computations over fixed symbols and 
rules. The reason is structural because the identities of relevant objects and operations 
are not fixed in advance but emerge retrospectively through persistence and reuse. 
The effective state space therefore expands over time in a way that cannot be 
enumerated a priori. Any finite history can be simulated retrospectively, but no single 
closed algorithm can predict in advance which new objects will arise, persist, or 
become causally significant. This reflects delayed discretisation and state -space 
expansion.  
 
What AT explains, then, is how e volution and selection allow ‘compactifying’ larger 
volumes of causal possibility within smaller volumes of physical space, increasing the 
virtualization of objects as they become deeper in assembly space, that is, as ‘life’ or 
‘intelligence’ carve deeper trajectories into what is possible.  
 
Entropy and Assembly 
To understand assembly  as a physical quantity , we can relate it to more familiar 
concepts like entropy. From our discussion on measurement, it should already be 
apparent that a ssembly index is unlike entropy, as it is not an ensemble quantity. 
Assembly index  is more like a topological or algorithmic invariant. Once the 
construction graphs are fixed, it is a property of the individual object (and therefore, 
for molecules , of the underlying quantum state that determines that structure). 
Assembly, by contrast , does play an analogous role  to entropy , but for structured 
objects under construction, not for ensembles under thermal mixing.  
 
Consider a toy example of two simple molecules with identical molecular formulae, 
C11H24, but different structures (they are structural isomers); 4-propanyloctane and 2,3-
dimethylnonane. Assembly index can characterise the amount of causal symmetry in 
32  
  
a molecule (how many steps are repeated), see Figure 5 . M olecules with different 
symmetries are also energetically distinguishable.  The molecules 2,3-dimethylnonane 
and 4 -propanyloctane have the same molecular formula, but differ in both their 
assembly index, which are 𝑎 = 5  and 𝑎 = 4  respectively, and in their heat of 
formation, which are -255.7 and -179.4 kJ mol -1 respectively. The less symmetrical 
molecule has the higher assembly index and the higher heat of formation. 
 
 
Figure 5. A minimum assembly path for 2,3 -dimethylnonane (left), 4-propanyloctane 
(right). Both molecules have the same molecular formula, C 11H24, and the  same 
Shannon entropy for their SMILES representations; (CC(C(C)C)CCCCCC and 
CCCC(C(C)C)CCCC of 3.8 respectively. They differ in their physical properties 
including assembly index, with 2,3 -dimethylnonane being 𝑎 = 5  and 4 -
propanyloctane being 𝑎 = 4  respectively, and heat of formation with 2,3 -
dimethylnonane being -255.7 and 4-propanyloctane being -179.4 kJ mol-1, respectively. 
 
Next, consider the following thought experiment in which we assume the production 
of the molecule Taxol increases fitness, and hence the production of Taxol increases 
with the growth and persistence of the Yew tree. A Taxol Demon represents the 

33  
  
construction machinery that assembles the Taxol molecules using the gases as 
reagents. The contribution to assembly, 𝐴 , from Taxol will increase in a sigmoidal 
fashion, see Figure 6, representing the constructed order in the molecules, mirroring 
the decrease in entropy.  
  
Figure 6. Left: A depiction of the process to construct Taxol from what would be its 
combustion products in oxygen, and the  hypothetical Taxol Demon. Right: The 
increase in assembly (𝐴) in Taxol. The entropy change of the system is depicted. With 
a change of assembly from 1.6 x108, the entropy of formation is -3.8 kJ K-1 mol-1. 
 
Recent advances in statistical physics have emphasized the importance of path -
dependence in non -equilibrium systems 50,51. Assembly also formalizes a concept of 
path-dependency, which does not abstractly assume all possible paths are physically 
real, nor does it assume we need to experimentally select a path directly for it to be 
real (e.g. we do not assume context dependency in the measurement of paths) . The 
space of all paths cannot be exhaustively sampled (nor computed) in any real complex 
physical system of interest, suggesting it does not make physical sense to assign 
probabilities over these spaces: they are too large for even the entire universe to ever 
sample52. AT replaces th e unphysical assumption  of state spaces that cannot be 
sampled with a precise, finite definition of microphysical causation and contingency , 
which could provide a n alternative  foundation for path -dependency in non -
equilibrium systems based on causal principles. 
 

34  
  
Causal Phase Transitions and Formalizing “Life”  
We are now in a position to discuss the nature of causal phase transitions within AT, 
and how these allow the formalization of “life” characterized by persist ent copies of 
objects in abiotically inaccessible regions of the assembly space.  Causal phase 
transitions underl ie the persistence of objects  beyond the threshold in its assembly 
space. As we have indicated, the  assembly index for each object is intensive to that 
object, as it does not depend on the amount of sample. But  𝐴, and  𝑎𝑀 are extensive, 
where both depend on the number of distinguishable objects 𝑁𝑇. The abiotic threshold 
𝑎𝑀 defines a critical surface in the space of possibilities, where any observed object  
with a larger assembly index than this, and which persists in multiple copies, can only 
be produced via a selective mechanism. Because 𝑎𝑀 is extensive, the assembly index 
of objects indicative of ‘life’ in the assembly space, will be system size dependent.  
 
For each substrate -dependent assembly space, it should be possible to  derive the 
conditions at a phase boundary , 𝑎𝑀 , marking the upper limit of the complexity of 
abiotic systems, which will be system -size and substrate dependent . In general, our 
simple model presented earlier will underestimate the size of the possibilities because 
it assumes a fixed branching, when we should expect the number of possibilities to 
increase more quickly than a simple exponential with increasing ass embly index. 
Nonetheless, we here use the simple model to also motivate some expectations about 
the phase behavior of 𝐴. Substituting equations (1) and (2) into equation (3) yields an 
effective description of 𝐴 in the absence of selection: 
(5) 
𝐴𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐 =  (𝑏 +  1
𝑁𝑇
− 1  ) 𝑒/𝑏  
𝑒 /𝑏 − 1 [( 𝑀 
(1 − 1/𝑏) 𝑁𝑇 +  1/𝑏)
2
𝑒/𝑏 − 1] 
 
Here the summation in Eq 3 is  up to 𝑎𝑀  , because for 𝑎 >  𝑎𝑀 , the terms are 
unobservable or zero. This is shown in Figure 7.  
35  
  
 
 
 
Figure 7:  Top: The abiotic assembly 𝐴 , consistent with a uniform copy number 
distribution over objects and a threshold 𝑎𝑀, decreases with the number of objects 𝑁𝑇. 
Shown is the distribution as a function of 𝑁𝑇  and the assembly for ATP at 
concentrations found within a typical bacterial cell. Bottom: Abiotic copy number 𝑛(𝑎) 
as a function of 𝑎 (y-axis) and 𝑁𝑇 (x-axis) for fixed branching (𝑏 =  25, as above), with 
the line for 𝑎𝑀 showing the division between objects expected to exist and those which 
are too assembled to exist in the absence of selection . The biological energy carrying 
molecule ATP, with 𝑎𝐴𝑇𝑃 = 21 is plotted using its molar concentration within a typical 
bacterial cell, showing how its assembly index and number density in cells place it 
within a causal structure regime beyond the threshold and indicative of life.  
 

36  
  
In prebiotic chemistry experiments, molecules with 𝑎 > 15 are sometimes observed53. 
One might therefore consider that our argument must be flawed, and the empirical 
results already invalidated. However, it must be noted that  all prebiotic chemistry 
experiments include some degree of selection, which comes in many forms ranging 
from using purified reagents, to controlling process conditions, to tightly controlling 
yield that are rarely reported , as well as introducing reagents with a high assembly 
index54. It is an open question how to best paramet erize and quantify these selective 
constraints55.  To be clear on the distinction, we use ‘abiotic’ in the strictest definition 
of the chemistry that preceded life, which had no human influence or design 56,57. This 
leaves the term ‘prebiotic’ to be used to denote specific selective circumstances directed 
towards producing the molecules found in biology on Earth, as found in most current 
experimental efforts in prebiotic chemistry. That is, ‘prebiotic’ describes those cases 
where post-selection on extant biology is used to constrain experimental design on its 
origin (e.g. justifying the prefix “pre” denoting ‘before’ as in ‘predict’, whereas the 
prefix ‘a’ denotes ‘not/without’ as in ‘asymmetrical’).  Prebiotic chemistry experiments 
represent significant selective constraints, placing nearly all experiments in the origin 
of life chemistry in the phase of causal structure associated with life, which is manifest 
in precise control by intelligent agents in the design and execution of prebiotic 
chemical experiments. Our hope is that AT will open new paths towards proper 
bookkeeping of these selective constraints and the design of experiments that allow 
more minimal (and quantifiable) selective constraints such that we might observe the 
genuine emergence of novelty, de novo selective causation, and life55. 
 
In the prevailing conception of physics, determinism is bottom -up, so the top -down 
constraints of the human chemist can easily be ignored, even if it is obvious they are 
doing most of the causal work. Yet, it has also been argued that one must invoke ‘top-
down’ causation to explain causal effects in life in current physics53. This is implicated 
in discussions of self -reference and semantic closure as necessary to explain the 
37  
  
life58 and open -ended evolution 59. However, we do not regard these features as 
necessary to a fundamental physics of open -ended evolution ; instead, they are 
emergent, effective properties characterizing some of our descriptions of open-ended 
spaces. Concepts like ‘top -down causation’, ‘self -reference’, and ‘semantic closure’ 
introduce paradoxes associated with supervenience54, and other paradoxes given 
there is no fundamental notion of ‘cause’ from which one might say causes are either 
bottom-up or top-down, or that information (semantic or otherwise) has causal power. 
This has p laced fundamental concepts related to the nature of the living state in 
conflict with fundamental concepts in physics. These cannot be simply reconciled by 
saying life is ‘emergent’, as such views have made little headway in solving open 
scientific problems like the transition mediating the origins of life.  
  
These paradoxes are resolved in AT. An assembly space of an object will not contain 
its own causation. This is important as it avoids the paradoxes of self -reference53: the 
hierarchy in existence afforded by AT , and the phase transitions associated with this 
hierarchy, mean no object is contained within its own assembly space.   In current 
physics and biology, hierarchy is defined in terms of spatial scale, or energy scale 
(which is related to spatial extent in physics). In assembly theory, hierarchy is defined 
in terms of causal possibilities . There is no preferred spatial scale, and causation 
emerges from the assembly space as it is constructed 42. The existence of objects can 
depend on causal structures that are much larger in time and space than the object 
itself. An example is a pencil55: although a pencil seems a simple, spatially small object 
that one can hold in one’s hand, it requires a massively distributed spatiotemporal 
causal structure for its existence, e.g., in the form of a technological infrastructure 
spanning multiple continents across the surface of a planet. Likewise, ATP as plotted 
in Fig 7, implicates that a structure like a biological cell must also exist, along with a 
myriad of other non-iterable structures necessary to its existence in the high assembly 
index, high copy number regime of the assembly space. Our models here are simple 
to illustrate the core concepts, and we have shown only the first such causal phase 
38  
  
transition; but we expect, given the dynamics we previously described on open ended 
evolution, that such phase transitions will be a recurring feature on inhabited planets 
that grow living and technological forms, as branching chains moving deeper into 
possibility.  
 
 
Conclusions 
In 1912, Bertrand Russell famously wrote60 that “The law of causality, I believe, like much 
that passes muster among philosophers, is a relic of a bygone age,” claiming that causality 
was largely useless for the sciences. His view seemed consistent with the deterministic, 
block-universe picture of the physical sciences: if everything is just part of one grand, 
fixed spacetime structure, then causes and effects might be no more than a convenient 
fiction, an artifact of our human perspective. This vision has left some of the most 
fascinating questions in science underexplored and unexplained. Chief among them 
is the emergence of complexity, including the origin of life. If the entire universe were 
a static block, lacking cause and effect, why would complex structures ever arise, 
especially self -maintaining structures like living cells? Some sort of fine -tuning 
mechanism for the initial state of the universe would be necessary 29, which is not 
parsimonious, as it invokes extra laws (initial conditions) that are not subject to 
experimental explanation.  
 
The radical departure of AT from existing paradigms is the prediction of a threshold 
in assembly index and copy number that delineates a fundamental boundary between 
what structures our universe can generate spontaneously at any time, and those that 
can on ly arise due to selective construction by other objects. The threshold differs 
depending on the causal mechanisms defining the substrate, but a threshold always 
exists. Objects above the threshold, like Taxol and watches (in respective substrate -
39  
  
specific assembly spaces), can only exist under very specific causal circumstances that 
select their construction and thus cannot form outside of an evolutionary lineage.  
 
Assembly theory formalizes how, conditioned on the structure of what we observe to 
exist, there is a large space of physically possible things that could also exist, but do  
not, because there is no causal mechanism for their formation. Thus, in open -ended 
evolutionary systems, the boundary of what is possible will be expanding with the 
amount of causation, evolving along with the assembly of objects that exist.  
 
The boundary of what is possible, and can come to exist, is not fixed but expands as 
systems become more complex. What was once impossible becomes possible and then 
probable and routine once a causal mechanism is selected. No single closed algorithm 
defined over a predetermined alphabet or rule set can fully specify, enumerate, or 
predict the future set of relevant objects, even though any finite fragment of an 
assembly history can be simulated or analysed algorithmically after the fact. This is a 
physical limitation on description and prediction, unpredictability, randomness, or 
hypercomputation. Computation cannot be used to predict possible causal futures. 
This physics is testable.  
 
Our universe is large in physical volume (approximately 93 billion lightyears in 
diameter) and deep in time (approximately 13.8 billion years in clock time). Less 
appreciated is that our universe is much larger in possibility than in realizability. The 
~1080 atoms in the observable universe may sound vast, but these can only ever be used 
to construct a finite and relatively small number of objects. That is, the size of what is 
possible is far larger (perhaps even undefinable) than the size of what is actual. Living 
structures virtualize the possible within physical objects, by instantiating large 
amounts of causation in small volumes of space and time. In addition to our universe 
40  
  
being deep in space and deep in time, we must contend with the fact that to support 
life and intelligence, we must live in a universe deep in possibility.  
 
References 
1. Pasteur, M. L. New Experiments Relating to What is Termed Spontaneous 
Generation. J. Cell Sci. 2, 118–123 (1861). 
2. Carroll, S. M. Why Boltzmann Brains Are Bad. in Current Controversies in Philosophy 
of Science (Routledge, 2020). 
3. Walker, S. I. Life As No One Knows It: The Physics of Life’s Emergence . (Penguin 
Random House, United States of America, 2024). 
4. Needham, J. T. A summary of some late observations upon the generation, 
composition, and decomposition of animal and vegetable substances; 
communicated in a letter to Martin Folkes Esq; President of the Royal Society, by 
Mr. Turbervill Needham, Fellow of the same Society. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 45, 615–666 
(1748). 
5. Reymond, J. -L., Ruddigkeit, L., Blum, L. & van Deursen, R. The enumeration of 
chemical space. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science  2, 
717–733 (2012). 
6. Nicolaou, K. C., Dai, W. -M. & Guy, R. K. Chemistry and Biology of Taxol. 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition 33, 15–44 (1994). 
7. Kanda, Y. et al. Two-Phase Synthesis of Taxol. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  142, 10526–10533 
(2020). 
41  
  
8. Nicolaou, K. C., Riemer, C., Kerr, M. A., Rideout, D. R. & Wrasidlo, W. W. Design, 
synthesis and biological activity of protaxols. Nature 364, 464–466 (1993). 
9. Paley, W. Natural Theology: Or, Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity 
Collected from the Appearances of Nature. (R. Faulder, London, 1802). 
10. Darwin, C. The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of 
Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. (John Murray, London, 1859). 
11. Wagner, A. Arrival of the Fittest: Solving Evolution’s Greatest Puzzle . (Penguin 
Random House, 2014). 
12. Smith, E. & Morowitz, H. The Origin and Nature of Life on Earth: The Emergence of the 
Fourth Geosphere. (Cambridge University Press, 2016). 
13. Walker, S. I. AI Is Life. Noema Magazine (2023). 
14. Arthur, W. B. The Nature of Technology: What It Is and How It Evolves . (Simon and 
Schuster, 2009). 
15. Simon, H. A. The Architecture of Complexity. Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Society 106, 467–482 (1962). 
16. Krakauer, D. C. The Complex World: An Introduction to the Foundations of Complexity 
Science. (SFI Press, 2024). 
17. Sharma, A. et al. Assembly theory explains and quantifies selection and evolution. 
Nature 622, 321–328 (2023). 
18. Marshall, S. M. et al. Identifying molecules as biosignatures with assembly theory 
and mass spectrometry. Nat Commun 12, 3033 (2021). 
42  
  
19. Marletto, C. Constructor theory of life. Journal of The Royal Society Interface  12, 
20141226 (2015). 
20. Theory of Self -Reproducing Automata . (University of Illinois, Urbana IL, 1966). 
doi:10.21236/AD0688840. 
21. Deutsch, D. Constructor theory. Synthese 190, 4331–4359 (2013). 
22. Shang, H. A generic hierarchical model of organic matter degradation and 
preservation in aquatic systems. Commun Earth Environ 4, 16 (2023). 
23. Bowman, J. C., Petrov, A. S., Frenkel-Pinter, M., Penev, P. I. & Williams, L. D. Root 
of the Tree: The Significance, Evolution, and Origins of the Ribosome. Chem. Rev. 
120, 4848–4878 (2020). 
24. Marshall, S. M., Moore, D. G., Murray, A. R. G., Walker, S. I. & Cronin, L. 
Formalising the Pathways to Life Using Assembly Spaces. Entropy 24, 884 (2022). 
25. Patarroyo, K. Y. et al.  Quantifying the Complexity of Materials with Assembly 
Theory. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2502.09750 (2025). 
26. Patarroyo, K. Y., Sharma, A., Walker, S. & Cronin, L. AssemblyCA: A Benchmark 
of Open -Endedness for Discrete Cellular Automata. in Second Agent Learning in 
Open-Endedness Workshop (2023). 
27. Janin, E., Shkolnik, E., Slocombe, L. & Walker, S. Searching for Life as We Don’t 
Know It: Detecting Signatures of Chemical Selection in Exoplanet Atmospheres. in 
246th Meeting of the American Astronomical Society vol. 246 313.06 (2025). 
43  
  
28. Seet, I., Patarroyo, K. Y., Siebert, G., Walker, S. I. & Cronin, L. Rapid Computation 
of the Assembly Index of Molecular Graphs. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.09100 (2024). 
29. Walker, S. I. & Davies, P. C. W. The ‘Hard Problem’ of Life. in From matter to life: 
information and causality 19–37 (Cambridge University Press, 2017). 
30. Wigner, E. P. Invariance in Physical Theory. Proceedings of the American Philosophical 
Society 93, 521–526 (1949). 
31. Liu, Y. et al. Exploring and mapping chemical space with molecular assembly trees. 
Science Advances 7, eabj2465 (2021). 
32. Marletto, C. et al.  Emergence of Constructor -Based Irreversibility in Quantum 
Systems: Theory and Experiment. Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 080401 (2022). 
33. Noether, E. Invariant variation problems. Transport Theory and Statistical Physics 1, 
186–207 (1971). 
34. Walker, S. I., Mathis, C., Marshall, S. & Cronin, L. Experimental Measurement of 
Assembly Indices are Required to Determine The Threshold for Life. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.06826 (2024). 
35. Davies, P. C. W. God and the New Physics. (Simon and Schuster, 1984). 
36. Hawking, S. The Illustrated A Brief History of Time: Updated and Expanded Edition . 
(Random House Publishing Group, 1996). 
37. Lloyd, S. Measures of Complexity a non --exhaustive list. IEEE Control Systems 
Magazine 21, 7–8 (2001). 
38. Pearl, J. Causality. (Cambridge University Press, 2009). 
44  
  
39. Marletto, C. The Science of Can and Can’t: A Physicist’s Journey through the Land of 
Counterfactuals. (Viking Press, 2021). 
40. Cronin, L., Pagel, S. & Sharma, A. Chemputer and Chemputation -- A Universal 
Chemical Compound Synthesis Machine. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2408.09171 (2025). 
41. Walker, S. I. The Descent of Math. in Trick or Truth? The Mysterious Connection 
Between Physics and Mathematics (eds Aguirre, A., Foster, B. & Merali, Z.) (Springer 
International Publishing, 2016). 
42. Mastrogiovanni, A. M. The Descent of Abstraction: Iterability, Assembly Theory, 
and the Origin of Ideality. Philosophy Today 69, 427–451 (2025). 
43. Walker, S. I. & Davies, P. C. W. The algorithmic origins of life. Journal of The Royal 
Society Interface 10, 20120869 (2013). 
44. Ardoline, M. J. Life Against Smallism: Assembly Theory, Scale, and the Order of 
Explanation. Philosophy Today 69, 453–467 (2025). 
45. Jaynes, E. T. Probability Theory: The Logic of Science . (Cambridge University Press, 
2003). 
46. Fox, G. Origin and Evolution of the Ribosome. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in 
Biology 2, a003483 (2010). 
47. Thomson, W. On an absolute thermometric scale founded on Carnot’s theory of 
the motive power of heat and calculated from Regnaut’s observations. Cambridge 
Philosophical Society Proceedings 1, 100–106 (1848). 
45  
  
48. Jirasek, M. et al.  Investigating and Quantifying Molecular Complexity Using 
Assembly Theory and Spectroscopy. ACS Cent. Sci. 10, 1054–1064 (2024). 
49. Lössl, P., van de Waterbeemd, M. & Heck, A. J. The diverse and expanding role of 
mass spectrometry in structural and molecular biology | The EMBO Journal. EMBO 
Journal 35, 2634–2657 (2016). 
50. Jarzynski, C. Nonequilibrium Equality for Free Energy Differences. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
78, 2690–2693 (1997). 
51. Crooks, G. E. Path-ensemble averages in systems driven far from equilibrium. Phys. 
Rev. E 61, 2361–2366 (2000). 
52. Kauffman, S. A. The Origins of Order: Self -Organization and Selection in Evolution . 
(Oxford University Press, 1993). 
53. Hirakawa, Y. et al. Interstep compatibility of a model for the prebiotic synthesis of 
RNA consistent with Hadean natural history. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 122, e2516418122 (2025). 
54. Richert, C. Prebiotic chemistry and human intervention. Nat Commun  9, 5177 
(2018). 
55. Cooper, G. J. T., Walker, S. I. & Cronin, L. A Universal Chemical Constructor to 
Explore the Nature and Origin of Life. in Conflicting Models for the Origin of Life 101–
130 (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2023). doi:10.1002/9781119555568.ch6. 
56. Walton, C., Rimmer, P. B., Williams, H. & Shorttle, O. Prebiotic Chemistry in the 
Wild: How Geology Interferes with the Origins of Life. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv.13198205.v1 (2020). 
46  
  
57. Cronin, L. & Walker, S. I. Beyond prebiotic chemistry. Science 352, 1174–1175 (2016). 
58. Pattee, H. H. Evolving Self -reference: Matter, Symbols, and Semantic Closure. in 
Laws, Language and Life: Howard Pattee’s classic papers on the physics of symbols with 
contemporary commentary  (eds Pattee, H. H. & Rączaszek -Leonardi, J.) 211 –226 
(Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2012). doi:10.1007/978-94-007-5161-3_14. 
59. Sayama, H. Construction theory, self -replication, and the halting problem. 
Complexity 13, 16–22 (2008). 
60. Russell, B. On the Notion of Cause. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society  13, 1–26 
(1912). 
61. Reichenbach, H. The Theory of Probability. (University of California Press, 1971). 
62. Venn, J. The Logic of Chance: An Essay on the Foundations and Province of the Theory of 
Probability, with Especial Reference to Its Logical Bearings and Its Application to Moral 
and Social Science, and to Statistics. (Macmillan, 1888). 
63. Mises, R. V. Probability, Statistics, and Truth. (Courier Corporation, 1981). 
64. Popper, K. R. The Propensity Interpretation of Probability. The British Journal for 
the Philosophy of Science 10, 25–42 (1959). 
65. Bayes, T. An essay towards solving a problem in the doctrine of chances. MD 
Comput (1991). 
66. Jeffreys, H. The Theory of Probability. (OUP Oxford, 1998). 
 
 
 
47  
  
 
Definitions 
 
Object, 𝒐𝒊: A physical entity that is (1) countable, (2) finite, and (3) can be disassembled 
(or assembled) by a finite sequence of recursive steps . Measurement places 
fundamental limits on the observation of objects, and their decomposition into parts.   
 
Selection: The action of causal mechanisms  allowing only subsets of possible  
structures to persist  and be observed . Unlike biological selection, which requires 
heredity and variation, this more general definition of selection includes biological 
mechanisms and those that happen outside of biology, such as the causal selective 
processes that led to the emergence of biological life.  
 
Cause: Structure that appear s on a minimal assembly path to an observed object. 
These structures are causal joins of two fragments , they are not a priori labelled, and 
their precise identity need not be known.  
 
Causation: A material attribute  revealed in the existence of objects, as encoded in a 
minimal assembly path.  
 
Assembly index, 𝒂𝒊:  The minimal number of causal joins required to realise an object 
under a specified set of generative rules determined from the object’s intrinsic causes. 
This is intensive to the object.  
 
Assembly path: A finite sequence of causal joins terminating on an observed object.  
 
Assembly space: The physical space denoting all causal possibilities, and subject to 
metrological interrogation.  
48  
  
 
Virtual object: Structures that appear on a minimal assembly path and may have no 
autonomous existence, because there does not necessarily exist a causal mechanism 
that can produce identical, countable copies of these structures in high numbers.  
 
Contingency: The dependence of an object’s existence on a hierarchy of objects  
causally prior to  its existence, where each object carries this dependence in a  virtual 
space of finite support (a minimal assembly path).  
 
Copy number, 𝒏𝒊 : T he countable number of each distinguishable object type, 𝑖 , 
(defined up to limits of measurement), which provides evidence of a contingent causal 
chain necessary to its existence.  
 
Measurement limit, 𝑴 :  The minimum copy number  of a distinguishable object 
necessary for that object to be reliably detected and identified by a given measurement 
or observational apparatus. 
 
Epistemological Threshold, 𝒂𝑴: A defined boundary in assembly space, set by the 
resolution of the measurement limit, 𝑀, where objects with a larger assembly index 
cannot exist and be observed in the absence of selection. This defines the boundary of 
the abiotic assembly space and is useful for detection of living and intelligent lineages.  
 
Ontological Threshold, 𝒂𝟏 : A defined boundary in assembly space, set where the 
resolution of measurement is exactly one object , and the threshold 𝑎𝑀  becomes an 
ontological limit delineating the maximum assembly index at which an object can exist 
at least once in a finite physical system in the absence of selection.  
 
Assemblage: The accumulated causal possibilities, recursively assembled to generate 
the set of distinguishable objects and their copies . This is a  causally deep 
49  
  
representation of matter , as it constitutes all the virtual structures necessary to the 
existence of the observed objects.  
 
Assembly, A: The density of causal possibilities per observed object, taken as the ratio 
of the copy number in the virtual space of objects to total number of countable objects 
in a sample. This captures cumulative selection in accounting for both the causal depth 
of objects in a combinatorially explosive space (assembly index)  and the persistence 
of the mechanisms to produce these objects (copy number) 
 
Assembly time, 𝒂: The number of causal joins in a constructive process to produce an 
object.  
 
Possibility: A causal join  that can happen, or an object that can exist.  These are 
encoded in the assembly space: possible objects or events are those that can be 
generated by selection.  
 
Probability: A phenomenological means to encode the role of the environment in an 
object’s existence , which allows quantifying the production rate or error -rate of 
making a specific object with a given accuracy in each existential context.  
 
 
Acknowledgements  
The development of AT has been a team effort starting since its birth in 2014. We would 
like to thank the following people and organisations for help without whom the theory 
would not have been possible to develop including but not limited to: Stuart Marshall, 
Douglas Moore, Alastair Murray, Cole Mathis, Abhishek Sharma, Dániel Czégel, 
Michael Lachmann, Christopher Kempes, Michael Jirasek, Heather Graham, Louie 
Slocombe, Paul Davies , Heinz Colter, and many others. The University of Glasgow, 
Arizona State University, NASA, the John Templeton Foundation, the Sloan 
50  
  
Foundation, Schmidt Sciences, the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research 
Council, the Breakthrough Prize Foundation.  We would like to thank A. Kahana, A. J. 
Laucks, T. Chiang and A. Wenger for extensive feedback  on early versions of this 
manuscript.  
 
 
Appendix A: Possibility and probability in assembly theory 
To understand the physics underlying assembly theory (AT), it is important to make 
a distinction between the concepts of “probable” and “possible”.  “Possible” indicates 
an event can happen, or an object can exist  (by existing causal mechanisms as no 
statement can be made for causation that does not exist) . Statements of possibility 
should not be confused with  statements of likelihood. It is  not possible to assign 
likelihoods to things that do not yet exist.  
 
In AT, we do not regard statements of what is “probable” to encode any information 
about what is possible. This motivations underlying this are in  contradistinction to 
other accounts of probability, e.g., the most common being  frequentist accounts61–63, 
propensity accounts 64, or Bayesian accounts 65,66. To understand this distinction, 
consider a statement like “Object 𝐴 has a probability 𝜌(𝐴) to occur”. Current accounts of 
probability will treat such a (physical or epistemological) statement as being about 𝐴, 
capturing the tendency , or belief about tendency , for 𝐴  to occur , in many cases  
conflating probability  with possibility . I n AT, we disentangle probability from 
possibility: p robabilistic statements about 𝐴  are not  intrinsic to 𝐴 ; instead, such 
statements are about the system and environment that generated 𝐴. That is, 𝜌(𝐴), is a 
feature of a causal mechanism that can assemble 𝐴. Some causal mechanism must exist 
for 𝐴  to be observed  (this can hold for either a physical  or epistemological 
interpretation of probability  in AT). In short, in AT, we do not regard probability as 
saying anything intrinsic to the object; rather, probabilistic statements are those that 
51  
  
encode information about what made the object . Consider the example of the 
ribosome, such structures  possible everywhere  (since we know these are possible 
here), but the only planet in the universe where it is probable is Earth. It is also possible 
that ribosomes will be probable in the future on other worlds, e.g., if Mars becomes 
inhabited with life from Earth; but no statement can yet be made (as of writing) about 
the probability of that possibility because it does not yet exist.  
 
Possibility is encoded in the assembly space : possible objects or events are those that 
can be generated, as described in  the definition of assembly space as a space of causal 
possibilities. Combined with the definition of an object in AT, possibility is open and 
undetermined, but expansion of what is possible is dependent on what objects exist. 
Probabilities can be assigned as a phenomenological means to encode the role of the 
environment of an object in that object’s assembly, e.g., assigning probabilities to steps 
allows talking about the production rate or error-rate of making a specific object with 
a given accuracy (an example is in how the probability for forming a ribosome should 
be assigned to the cell, not the ribosome) . Assigning probabilities to events or objects 
is only possible if those events or objects are already selected to exist, and this is not a 
feature of the object because it exists in a context outside the object’s assembly space.  
 
Appendix B: Derivation of assembly index threshold, 𝒂𝑴 
An assembly theoretic question of interest is: What is the limit on the  space of possible 
objects with no selection? The assembly space is a recursive, branching space, where 
fragments are combined to produce new structure. Being clear on the distinction 
between possible and probable allows defining a threshold on what is possible in the 
absence of environmental or constructive selection.  
 
As a simplification, we consider a branching process where each node has 𝑏 
descendants. This branching structure is a feature of the assembly space, and 𝑏 allows 
52  
  
encoding what is possible in terms of causal steps from each fragment in the space. 
We can also assign to each step a probability 𝑞, which is not a feature of the objects or 
the assembly space, but of the environment al context that might build the object (for 
example, 𝑞  might encode the error rate in a constructor  or more physically an 
assembler in the environment ). In reality, 𝑏  and 𝑞  are not global parameters, but  
instead reflect local structure in the assembly space and of the mechanism(s) that build 
it, respectively. For example, 𝑏 might be higher in regions of chemical space where 
there is a dominance of C atoms, and lower where there is a dominance of N atoms 
because of the possible bonds available to support causal joining in these regions. We 
expect 𝑞 to in some cases be weakly global, e.g. in the case that some  general classes 
of bonding mechanisms are more likely in some planetary environments due to pH, 
temperature etc.; in most cases 𝑞 will be exceptionally local, e.g., as is the case  when 
enzymes catalyze very specific sets of transformations to make some reactions much 
more likely to occur.  
 
For purposes of illustrating the existence of a threshold, we treat these as global 
parameters (we  will treat locality  in the topology of the assembly space  in future 
work). This simplification does not impact the conclusion of an objectively 
determinable boundary for the assembly index, 𝑎𝑀, but merely serves to elucidate its 
existence.   
 
Materializing an object is the process of bringing it into existence in at least one copy. 
In the absence of selection, the possibility of materializing an object at a depth 𝑎 is: 
𝑝(𝑎) =  (𝑞
𝑏)
𝑎
 
This captures how at each step there are 𝑏 new possible paths, which, if an assembler 
exists might be explored at a rate 𝑞 . Since 𝑏 ≥ 1  (every branch has at least one 
descendant, and the space is open -ended), and 0 ≤ 𝑞 ≤ 1  (to obey the law of total 
53  
  
probability for each branch either being realized or not).  The possibility of objects will 
always decrease exponentially with 𝑎:  
 
For  
𝑞
𝑏  <  1, the probability of objects requiring long paths shrinks exponentially 
For  
𝑞
𝑏 → 1 , objects requiring more steps can be produced  along contingent paths , 
indicating how selection, via the action of an assembler,  can act to increase 𝑞, along 
specific paths by eliminating following other branches 
 
It is not possible to assign probabilities to objects unless they are observed, thus 𝑞 can 
only be assigned if an object already exists and there is thus an existing causal  
mechanism for assembling the object . 𝑞 ≠ 0 only if an object is observed (exists) , The 
𝑞 = 1 case is identical to the case of equivalent exploration of everything that could be 
possible, that is, no selection. In the main text, we are concerned with the fundamental 
limits on possibility, not probability, and so we set q = 1, such that all branches at a 
given assembly time are equivalent and possible . In a combinatorial, recursively 
constructable space, the number of possible objects formed in successions of such 
events is expected to grow super exponentially , so what we present here is a very 
approximate argument as the space will grow much faster.  
 
In what follows, we define 𝛽 = 𝑞/𝑏, such that a global parameterization of 𝑞 is kept 
explicit, even if ultimately unphysical for most objects of interest . This is to allow at 
least some  indication of how 𝑎𝑀  can shift when physical objects become more 
probable because of selection, allowing the possibility for open-ended evolution and 
the origin of life (and novel forms)  as a continuous process  (but not of course 
guaranteeing it as probable). In the main text, 𝑏 = 1/𝛽. 
 
We normalize the probability over all objects by dividing by the sum over all 
paths/branches: 
54  
  
(B.1) 
𝑃(𝑎)=  𝑝(𝑎)
∑𝑝(𝑎) 
 
Such that the expected number of objects at depth 𝑎 in the branching process is:  
(B.2) 
〈𝑛(𝑎)〉 =  𝑝(𝑎)
∑𝑝(𝑎) 𝑁𝑇 =  𝛽𝑎
∑𝛽𝑎  𝑁𝑇 
 
where 𝑁𝑇 is the total number of objects  over all populated branches .  We note that 
objects either exist, or they do not, so  〈𝑛(𝑎)〉 cannot be < 1 (e.g., consistent with the 
copy number principle  and establishing an ontological bound on assembly index ). 
However, in practice most scientific instruments can detect objects if they exist in 
multiple copies. Thus, we define a measurement cutoff 𝑀 , defined as the minimal 
number of copies for a scientific  or observational instrument to detect the structure. 
For example, for mass spectrometry, 𝑀 =  10,000 molecules.  
 
We can define an assembly index threshold at depth 𝑎𝑀, where the condition  at the 
limit of existence is met: 
 
(B.3) 
 
〈𝑛(𝑎𝑀)〉 = 𝑀 
Thus, we have: 
〈𝑛(𝑎𝑀)〉 = 𝛽𝑎𝑀
∑ 𝛽𝑎𝑎𝑀
1
 𝑁𝑇 = 𝑀 
 
We first solve the denominator, where we note the sum runs over integer values of 
assembly steps, 𝑎 = {1, … . , 𝑎𝑀} , on the assumption that we are counting all objects 
55  
  
formed in integer causal steps,  with a minimum of one step, up to 𝑎𝑀 steps. Noting 
𝛽 <  1, the sum is a geometric series and converges to:  
 
∑ 𝛽𝑎𝑎𝑀
1 =  𝛽  (1 − 𝛽𝑎𝑀) (1 − 𝛽)⁄   
 
where we have used ∑𝑟𝑘𝑛
1 =  𝑟  (1 − 𝑟𝑛) (1 − 𝑟)⁄ . Substituting into the equation for 
〈𝑛(𝑎𝑀)〉 yields:  
〈𝑛(𝑎𝑀)〉 = 𝛽𝑎𝑀−1
(1 − 𝛽𝑎𝑀) (1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 = 𝑀 
We use this form to solve for 𝑎𝑀: 
𝛽𝑎𝑀−1 (1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 = 𝑀− 𝛽𝑎𝑀 
𝛽𝑎𝑀−1 (1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽𝑎𝑀 = 𝑀 
𝛽𝑎𝑀−1 (1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽 ∙ 𝛽𝑎𝑀−1 = 𝑀 
𝛽𝑎𝑀−1( (1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽)= 𝑀 
𝛽𝑎𝑀−1 = 𝑀
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽 
ln[𝛽𝑎𝑀−1] = ln[ 𝑀
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽] 
(𝑎𝑀 − 1) ln[𝛽]     = ln [M]  − ln[(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽]    
(B.4) 
𝑎𝑀 = 1 +  ln [M] −   ln[(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽]
ln[𝛽]  
 
Using this expression for  𝑎𝑀  we can also revise our  general expression for 〈𝑛(𝑎)〉 . 
Starting from the most general form, which includes the explicit dependence on the 
cutoff value of 𝑎𝑀 we have (here we have taken the sum in B.2 up to 𝑎𝑀 as all larger 
terms are zero or unobservable):  
〈𝑛(𝑎)〉 = 𝛽𝑎−1
(1 − 𝛽𝑎𝑀) (1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 
This expression can be simplified as follows . We start with the term in the 
denominator:  
56  
  
𝛽𝑎𝑀 =  𝛽
1+ ln[M]−ln[(1−𝛽) 𝑁𝑇+ 𝛽]
ln[𝛽]  
 
=  𝛽 ∙ 𝛽
 ln[𝑀 (1−𝛽) 𝑁𝑇+ 𝛽⁄ ]
ln[𝛽]  
 
Using the property of exponentials 𝛽
ln 𝐴
ln 𝛽 = 𝑒
(ln 𝐴
ln 𝛽)ln𝛽
= 𝑒ln𝐴 = 𝐴  with 𝐴 =  
𝑀
(1−𝛽) 𝑁𝑇+ 𝛽  
yields: 
(B.5) 
𝛽𝑎𝑀 =  𝛽 𝑀
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽 
then 
1 − 𝛽𝑎𝑀 =  1 − 𝛽 𝑀
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽 
=  
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽 − 𝛽 𝑀
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽  
=  
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 + (1 − 𝑀)𝛽
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽  
=  
(1 − 𝛽)𝑁𝑇 + (1 − 𝑀)𝛽
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽  
 
Substituting into the equation for 〈𝑛(𝑎)〉 yields: 
 
〈𝑛(𝑎)〉 = 𝛽𝑎−1 ((1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽)
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 + (1 − 𝑀)𝛽 (1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 
= 𝛽𝑎−1(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇
 ((1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽)
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 + (1 − 𝑀)𝛽   
 
This yields a final, selection free expression for copy number over abiotic possibilities:  
 
(B.6) 
〈𝑛(𝑎)〉  = 𝛽𝑎−1  [
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽
1 +  (1 − 𝑀)𝛽
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇
] 
 
57  
  
For 𝑁𝑇 → 0 , both 𝑞  and 𝑏  also approach 0, and the limits of the equation behave as 
expected.  
 
Appendix C: Derivation of abiotic assembly  
We can use equation B.4.  and B.6 to solve for the abiotic assembly, 𝐴𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐, starting 
from the equation for assembly, 𝐴:  
 
𝐴 = 1
𝑁𝑇
∑ 𝑛𝑖 𝑒𝑎𝑖 
𝑁
𝑖𝜖𝑛𝑖>1
 
 
Combining all objects with the same assembly index together yields: 
 
𝐴𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐 = ∑ 𝑒𝑎 (𝛽𝑎−1 ((1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽)
𝑁𝑇
)
𝑎𝑀
1
      
     = ∑ 𝑒𝑎 (𝛽𝑎−1 +  ( 1
𝑁𝑇
− 1) 𝛽𝑎)
𝑎𝑀
1
 
= ∑ 𝑒𝑎 (𝛽−1𝛽𝑎 +  ( 1
𝑁𝑇
− 1) 𝛽𝑎)
𝑎𝑀
1
 
= ∑ 𝑒𝑎 𝛽𝑎 (𝛽−1 +  1
𝑁𝑇
− 1)
𝑎𝑀
1
 
= (𝛽−1 +  1
𝑁𝑇
− 1 ) ∑ 𝑒𝑎 𝛽𝑎
𝑎𝑀
1
 
 
For 𝑒 ⋅  𝛽 < 1 the sum converges and  
 
(C.1) 
𝐴𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐 =  (𝛽−1 +  1
𝑁𝑇
− 1  ) 𝑒 ∙ 𝛽  [𝑒𝑎𝑀 𝛽𝑎𝑀 − 1]
𝑒 ∙ 𝛽 − 1  
58  
  
 
We can remove the dependency on 𝑎𝑀, using Eq. B.4 to yield a final expression: 
 
𝐴𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐 =  (𝛽−1 +  1
𝑁𝑇
− 1  ) 𝑒 ∙ 𝛽  
𝑒 ∙ 𝛽 − 1 [( 𝑀 
(1 − 𝛽) 𝑁𝑇 +  𝛽)
2
𝑒 ∙ 𝛽 − 1] 
 
We note in the discussion explaining Assembly as quantification of causation in virtual 
copies per realized object, we took b→ ∞ to represent the uncountable counterfactual 
possible causal joins folded into each step in the assembly space. For that limit,  
lim
𝑏 →∞
𝐴𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐  ∝ 𝑀2/𝑁𝑇
2 , meaning the upper limit on abiotic causation is higher for 
smaller systems, with potential implications for the emergence of life in smaller 
volumes with denser assemblages.  
 
 